uNESsential   0.13    
By Johannes Holmberg  

0. Contents               
  1........Introduction  
  2........What's new    
  3........Instructions  
  4........Requirements  
  5........Emulation     
  6........Misc Stuff    
  7........Credits       
  8........Disclaimer    
  9........More stuff    
                           

1. Introduction                                                  
                                                                   
  uNESsential is a NES emulator.                                   
  I know exactly what you are thinking:                            
  "Not another one!"                                               
  Sorry, but you'll just have to live with it.                     
  uNESsential however, has little in common with other emulators.  
  uNESsential is the worst NES emulator ever made!                 
  It is slow, ugly, quiet and the compatibility level is           
  lower than you ever imagined possible!                           
  "So why didn't you make a better emulator?", you're asking.      
  Well, I tried my best, and even though I'm not the greatest
  programmer the world has seen, I think the main reason is
  that I did it in QBasic.


2. What's new                
                               
  Version 0.13                    
  - New sprite engine with sprite flipping.
  - A few more opcodes emulated.
  - 8x16 sprite support (buggy(?)).
  - Typos fixed in BMI, INY and JMP opcodes.
  - Bugs fixed in the following opcodes:
      ADC, ASL, BIT, BRK, CMP, CPX, CPY, LSR, ROL, ROR and SBC.
  - Very minor speed increase.
  - VBlank-waiting-loop skipping.
  - Sprite DMA register.
  - Bug in VRAM reading fixed.
  - Bug in register $2002 fixed.
  - Breakpoints.

3. Instructions                                                    
                                                                     
  How to use it:                                                     
  Run the uness.exe file, and type in a filename, preferrably        
  one of a NES ROM, and the emulator will do its best to run it.     
                                                                     
  Joypad Keys:                                                       
  Arrows - Directional pad                                           
  Z      - A                                                         
  X      - B                                                         
  C      - Select                                                    
  V      - Start                                                     
                                                                     
  Other Keys:                                                        
                                                                     
  Q      - Quit                                                      
  O      - Toggle opcode output                                      
  P      - Toggle opcode output                                      
  B      - Breakpoint

  Joypad emulation works on a toggle basis. Don't keep the physical  
  keys pressed, or you will go deaf.
  To set a breakpoint, press B and then use the keys 1,2,3 and 4 to
  choose a breakpoint and hit enter.


  4. Requirements                                            
                                                             
  I'm not sure about system requirements really, but here's  
  what I think should be sufficient:                         
                                                             
  A PC capable of VGA graphics.                              
  About 100kb of hard drive space for swap files.            
  A few kilobytes of conventional memory.                    
                                                             
  A Pentium II is highly recommended.
                                                             
  To play games at full speed (60 fps) you will need a       
  processor of at least 100Ghz.                              


5. Emulation                                                  
                                                                
  What it emulates:                                             
  - Most of the 6502 opcodes                                    
  - Most of the PPU
  - Joypad 1                                                    
                                                                
  What it will emulate in the future:                           
  - All 6502 opcodes                                            
  - Attribute tables
  - Scrolling
  - Joypad 2 (Possibly 3 and 4 too)                             
  - Palettes                                                    
  - Sound (only if I manage to speed up emulation remarkably).  
  - Some more mappers.                                          



6. Misc.                                                     
                                                               
  Other things you should know:                                

  If you are planning on writing your own NES emulator,
  I can not recommend you to rely on the opcode output         
  of uNESsential. Many opcodes are probably buggy.                                                          
                                                               
  uNESsential does not have a line by line graphics engine,    
  and it probably never will have, since that almost requires  
  double buffering or page flipping, which is impossible at    
  decent speed in QBasic (In VGA).                             

  Sprite flipping does not currently work in the y-axis when
  using 8x16 sprites. I haven't implemented that function,
  because I don't know of any rom which uses it and therefore
  it would probably become incredibly buggy...

  I will probably implement palette emulation soon, but
  the colours will never be correct since I'm using a 16 colour
  video mode.

  Compatibility list:
  I can't be bothered to make a complete list, but here are the highlights:
  Balloon Fight works perfectly (except scrolling).
  Every homebrewn rom I've tried works perfectly.
  Mail me if you find a homebrewn rom which doesn't work.

  Why uNESs? The extra 's' is because I don't want people to   
  confuse uNESsential with another emulator called             
  Ultimate NES (uNES).                                         

7. Credits                                                  
                                                              
  Thanks to the following people who made this possible:
                                                              
  - Marat Fayzullin and Yoshi for their invaluable NES docs.  
  - Loopy for making LoopyNES which has helped incredibly.    
  - Goroh for taking the time to answer my sprite questions.  
  - Tony Young for creating Junkrom and Mouser.               
  - Chris Covell for making his various NES ROMs.             
  - _Bnu for getting me started when I knew nothing.          
  - AtLaS for thinking of the name uNESsential.               
  - AkIlLa^ for pointing out errors and making suggestions.
  - Whoever wrote the testcart.nes rom.
  - Probably some more people. Mail me if I forgot you.       



8. Disclaimer                                                     
                                                                    
  Who cares anyway? Let me just say one thing: "It's not my fault!" 



9. More stuff                                           
                                                          
  Feel free to mail me at bapple@home.se.                 
  The latest version of uNESsential can be downloaded at: 
  http://www.emucamp.com/unessential/                     
  Copyright - Johannes Holmberg 1998                      


"Oh no, run!" -R.W.
